notes.md, before:

A generic RV32I core, that should later be parameterized to also support RV64 and the IMAFDZicsr_Zifencei extensions.

# TODO:
- Add explicit valid/ready signalling between pipeline stages. Instead of passing NOP's into Decode from Fetch,
  simply take valid low. Valid should then propagate through the remaining pipeline stages.
  - This also allows us to stall the pipeline without an explicit stall signal: If ready is not high
    (eg delayed memory load), we don't propagate from ID into EX
  - Use of stall/flush are for special circumstances (e.g. load-use hazard). If delayed memory load, that should
    be resolvable without manual intervention
- Stall IF,ID,EX if memory load/store operation does not process in one clock cycle
- Send NOPs and keep PC constant if new instruction is not fetched in one clock cycle
- Implement trap handler and simple traps (exit, print)
  - Add extra signal `trap` which is high when trapped. When trapping, if `mcause` contains a given value (TBD)
    we exit simulation early.
  - print-trap should not be in software, but should be a trap handler at predefined memory location.

# Stages
## core.stages.Fetch
core.stages.Fetch stage contains the PC and fetches instructions from an external instruction memory / instruction cache.

IO:
- To imem / icache
  - addr: output, address to access
  - req: output, flag indicating that we actually want to access this memory location
  - instr: input, instruction word fetched from mem[addr]
  - ack: input, acknowledge indicating that the desired instruction word can be sampled on this CC
- To decode stage
  - instr: output, the instruction word
  - pc: output, the PC value for that instruction word
- Control signals
  - loadPC: input, asserted when a branch or jump is executed and new PC should be loaded
  - nextPC: input, the new pc to go to when loadPC is asserted

## Decode
- Control signals
  - flush: input, asserted when instruction should be converted to a NOP

## riscv_core.Execute
- We need 3 comparators. rs1 < rs2, rs1 == rs2, rs1 < rs2 (u)
  - BEQ: rs1 == rs2
  - BNE: !(rs1 == rs2)
  - BLT: rs1 < rs2
  - BGE: !(rs1 < rs2)
  - BLTU: rs1 < rs2 (u)
  - BGEU: !(rs1 < rs2 (u))
  - DONE

- Circuit that generates values that will be written into regfile
  - Operating on rs1/rs2 or rs1/imm
    - ADD, SUB, OR, XOR, AND, SLT, SLTU, SLL, SRL, SRA, 
    - DONE
  - Operating on PC and constant 4
    - JAL, JALR
    - We always calculate it, if ctrl.branch is set, we use that value instead of aluOut
    - DONE


- Circuit that generates pc_next value
  - Operating on PC + imm
    - JAL, all branches
  - Operating on rs1 + imm
    - JALR, must set LSB of result to 0
- DONE

- Control signals
  - op2src: whether the second operand comes from regfile (0) or sign-ext immediate (1)

## core.stages.Memory

- IO
  - addr: output address to access
  - req: output, flag indicating that we actually want to access this memory location
  - rdata (XLEN): input, data word fetched from mem[addr]
  - wdata (XLEN): output, data word to write to mem[addr]
  - ack: input, acknowledge indicating that the desired instruction word can be sampled on the NEXT cc
- Control signals
  - writeMem: input, whether memory should be written
  - readMem: input, whether memory should be read

## core.stages.Writeback
- Control signals
  - we: Whether to write the result from the mem-stage into regfile
  - memRead: Whether to use result from mem-stage or ex-stage as the final result

# Others
## Hazard detection
The only hazard in the RV32I processor is the load-use hazard, which generates a stall in the IF, ID stages.
This can be detected when the LD instruction is in the EX stage and the USE instruction in the ID stage, only requiring a stall of ID
and IF.

## Forwarding
Values can be forwarded to EX from MEM and WB. 
- WB can forward its result
- MEM can only forward the value received from ex.res, and not the value being fetched from memory. 

## Branch flushing

Commit message:

WIP add delayed memory loads, rework simulation harness and drivers
Updated memory fetch interface to work with reworked memory harness,
adding tests showing delayed memory loads working is still WIP

notes.md, after:

A generic RV32I core, that should later be parameterized to also support RV64 and the IMAFDZicsr_Zifencei extensions.

# TODO:
- Add explicit valid/ready signalling between pipeline stages. Instead of passing NOP's into Decode from Fetch,
  simply take valid low. Valid should then propagate through the remaining pipeline stages.
  - This also allows us to stall the pipeline without an explicit stall signal: If ready is not high
    (eg delayed memory load), we don't propagate from ID into EX
  - Use of stall/flush are for special circumstances (e.g. load-use hazard). If delayed memory load, that should
    be resolvable without manual intervention
- Would be nice if all signals propagated forward together (instruction stored in IF/ID pipeline reg)
  - In current impl, requires double-buffering of pc
- Stall IF,ID,EX if memory load/store operation does not process in one clock cycle
- Send NOPs and keep PC constant if new instruction is not fetched in one clock cycle
- Implement trap handler and simple traps (exit, print)
  - Add extra signal `trap` which is high when trapped. When trapping, if `mcause` contains a given value (TBD)
    we exit simulation early.
  - print-trap should not be in software, but should be a trap handler at predefined memory location.

Current problem: io.dmem.in.ack is combinationally tied to io.imem.out.addr through the hazard detection module
that stalls the IF stage. This breaks ChiselTest.
- Potential fix. When ID stage is stalled, switch to operating on instruction saved in register instead of 
  value received from I$. This keeps output correct.
- When ID is de-stalled, it should send out stalled instruction on that same CC, take instruction from I$ 
  on next CC

cycle 0: Instruction A enters ID stage
cycle 1: Instruction B enters. Halfway through, ID.stall is asserted
cycle 2: Instruction B is in register, flag has been set high. ID.stall is still asserted
cycle 3: --||--
cycle 4: Instrutction B is in register, flag is still high. ID.stall is deasserted at some point
cycle 5: Instruction C enters from I$. Flag has been set low
  - flagReg = RegNext(io.hzd.stall)

In IF stage
cycle 1: Instruction C request is launched. Stall arrives
cycle 2: Instruction C request is kept constant instead of moving on to instruction D
cycle 3: --||--
cycle 4: IF.stall is deasserted. Instruction C request is kept constant
cycle 5: Instruction C enters from I$. Instruction D request is launched.

This would decouple the IMEM address and DMEM ack

Current problem: With two items forked out to handle dmem requests, things get messy
- Instead of registering multiple modules, register functions with the DmemDriver.
  If the address matches their address, they get to handle the port for as long as they wish

# Stages
## core.stages.Fetch
core.stages.Fetch stage contains the PC and fetches instructions from an external instruction memory / instruction cache.

IO:
- To imem / icache
  - addr: output, address to access
  - req: output, flag indicating that we actually want to access this memory location
  - instr: input, instruction word fetched from mem[addr]
  - ack: input, acknowledge indicating that the desired instruction word can be sampled on this CC
- To decode stage
  - instr: output, the instruction word
  - pc: output, the PC value for that instruction word
- Control signals
  - loadPC: input, asserted when a branch or jump is executed and new PC should be loaded
  - nextPC: input, the new pc to go to when loadPC is asserted

## Decode
- Control signals
  - flush: input, asserted when instruction should be converted to a NOP

## riscv_core.Execute
- We need 3 comparators. rs1 < rs2, rs1 == rs2, rs1 < rs2 (u)
  - BEQ: rs1 == rs2
  - BNE: !(rs1 == rs2)
  - BLT: rs1 < rs2
  - BGE: !(rs1 < rs2)
  - BLTU: rs1 < rs2 (u)
  - BGEU: !(rs1 < rs2 (u))
  - DONE

- Circuit that generates values that will be written into regfile
  - Operating on rs1/rs2 or rs1/imm
    - ADD, SUB, OR, XOR, AND, SLT, SLTU, SLL, SRL, SRA, 
    - DONE
  - Operating on PC and constant 4
    - JAL, JALR
    - We always calculate it, if ctrl.branch is set, we use that value instead of aluOut
    - DONE


- Circuit that generates pc_next value
  - Operating on PC + imm
    - JAL, all branches
  - Operating on rs1 + imm
    - JALR, must set LSB of result to 0
- DONE

- Control signals
  - op2src: whether the second operand comes from regfile (0) or sign-ext immediate (1)

## core.stages.Memory

- IO
  - addr: output address to access
  - req: output, flag indicating that we actually want to access this memory location
  - rdata (XLEN): input, data word fetched from mem[addr]
  - wdata (XLEN): output, data word to write to mem[addr]
  - ack: input, acknowledge indicating that the desired instruction word can be sampled on the NEXT cc
- Control signals
  - writeMem: input, whether memory should be written
  - readMem: input, whether memory should be read

## core.stages.Writeback
- Control signals
  - we: Whether to write the result from the mem-stage into regfile
  - memRead: Whether to use result from mem-stage or ex-stage as the final result

# Others
## Hazard detection
The only hazard in the RV32I processor is the load-use hazard, which generates a stall in the IF, ID stages.
This can be detected when the LD instruction is in the EX stage and the USE instruction in the ID stage, only requiring a stall of ID
and IF.

## Forwarding
Values can be forwarded to EX from MEM and WB. 
- WB can forward its result
- MEM can only forward the value received from ex.res, and not the value being fetched from memory. 

## Branch flushing
